.. meta::
    :title: 2026-W10
    :date: 2026-03-02T18:00:41.131666


This Week
---------

Unfortunately, this week I wasn't able to pick the
https://github.com/pypackaging-native/pkgconf-pypi work back up, due to my ADHD
shifting my focus to the CPython work. I am happy with what I was able to
accomplish there — I think the UX improvements are significant — but since none
of that was funded, I have no billable hours for this entire week, which is not
sustainable.

I'll link my `Github sponsors page`_ here, in case anyone wants to make a
contribution for this work.

CPython
+++++++

This week I worked on a couple improvements to the interpreter initialization.

The initial motivation was to tackle the obscure/unclear "unraisable" errors
that can occur while setting up the interpreter. A common example is the
``No module named 'encodings'`` error resulting from the standard library being
missing from the `module search path`_.

.. code:: shell

    $ PYTHONHOME=nonsense ./python -c 'print("foo!")'
    Fatal Python error: Failed to import encodings module
    Python runtime state: core initialized
    Exception ignored in the internal traceback machinery:
    ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'traceback'
    ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'encodings'

    Stack (most recent call first):

It occurs because during the initialization process, the interpreter tries to
import the ``encodings`` module, required by ``builtins.open``.

The two main changes I made here were adding a warning when we fail to find
the standard library, and freezing the ``encodings`` module, resulting in the
following:

.. code:: shell

    $ PYTHONHOME=nonsense ./python -c 'print("foo!")'
    WARN: Could not find the standard library directory! The Python 'home' directory was set to 'nonsense', is this correct?
    foo!

Additionally, with the addition of this warning, I also added the
``-X pathconfig_warnings`` CLI option, and the PYTHON_PATHCONFIG_WARNINGS_
environment variable, which allow disabling warnings issued by the
`module search path`_ initialization.

You can read a more in-depth write-up on the technical details in the dedicated
section below.

Finally, also related to the UX during the Python interpreter initialization,
I'd like to highlight `Steve Dower`_'s PR to remove the hard dependency on the
``__pyrepl`` module (https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/145159) from
several places. This makes it so that the interpreter automatically falls back
to the basic REPL when it can't find the standard library, without needing to
set the ``PYTHON_BASIC_REPL`` environment variable, which most users don't know
about.

.. code:: shell

    $ PYTHONHOME=nonsense ./python
    WARN: Could not find the standard library directory! The Python 'home' directory was set to 'nonsense', is this correct?
    Python 3.15.0a6+ free-threading build (heads/optional-pyrepl:3b745a340dd, Mar  9 2026, 14:50:41) [GCC 15.2.1 20260209] on linux
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    >>> import sys
    >>> sys.path
    ['', '/usr/local/lib/python315t.zip', '/home/anubis/git/cpython/nonsense/lib/python3.15t', '/home/anubisgit/cpython/build/lib.linux-x86_64-3.15', '/home/anubis/.local/lib/python3.15t/site-packages']
    >>>

After implementing this, and seeing Steve's PR, I realized this pretty much
solves the issue around `._pth files`_ being incredibly difficult to debug,
so much so that there has been extensive discussion around deprecating them
(https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/78125).

With these improvements, if you happen to have a misconfigured ``._pth`` file,
instead of the interpreter failing miserably to launch with an obscure error,
you can now drop into a REPL and inspect ``sys.path`` to understand what went
wrong.

.. admonition:: Running local builds
    :class: note

    When running Python from the build directory, the
    ``-X frozen_modules``/``PYTHON_FROZEN_MODULES`` option is disabled.
    To achieve the behavior described here, that option needs to be enabled.


The Python module search path initialization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At a certain point during the `interpreter initialization`_, a private
"module" called ``getpath`` is run to compute the `path configuration`_,
finalizing ``PyConfig``. More importantly, it sets ``module_search_paths``,
which becomes ``sys.path``.

While we call it a "module", that's not *really* accurate. It is a piece of
Python code that runs with a custom ``globals``/``locals`` dictionary, which is
used to pass the input configuration, as well as retrieve the computed output
parameters.

As documented in the link above, it computes several ``PyConfig`` fields, with
``module_search_paths`` being the one of most interest to us.

Most folks know of ``sys.path`` as the field by the import machinery to find
user modules, but more importantly, it also provides the location where several
key parts of the standard library can be found.

I said *several*, not *all*, because ``sys.path`` specifies file-system paths
where Python modules can be found, and not all of the standard library
implementation exists on the file-system — at least not as "regular" modules.

The standard library is composed of three parts:

Built-in modules
    These are native modules, which are directly embedded (statically linked) in
    the interpreter. As such, they do not exist on their on in the file-system.

Extension modules
    These are native modules, provided as a loadable file (shared/dynamic
    library). They exist in the "platform-specific standard library directory",
    usually referred to as ``platstdlib_dir``.

Pure-Python modules
    These are modules written in Python (``*.py``), being platform-independent.
    They usually exist in the "platform-independent standard library directory",
    usually referred to as ``stdlib_dir``, but in certain scenarios, they can
    also exists as ZIP file.

Only the latter two exist on the file-system, so only they are in the purview of
``sys.path``. Built-in modules, on the other hand, require a custom non
path-based importer — ``BuiltinImporter`` — which exists on ``sys.meta_path``.

Without going into much detail, ``sys.meta_path`` exists upstream of
``sys.path``, and defines the base machinery for the import system. It contains
a list of importer_ objects, which know how to find and load modules. During the
initialization of the import system, it gets populated with ``BuiltinImporter``,
``FrozenImporter``, and ``PathFinder``. We already discussed
``BuiltinImporter``, leaving only ``FrozenImporter`` and ``PathImporter``.

``PathImporter`` is fairly straightforward, it regular path-based module search,
which most users are familiar with, meaning it is responsible for searching
``sys.path``. However, is also provides a mechanism where users can register
hooks to ``sys.path_hooks`` that can produce a finder given a path. This is
how support for importing pure-Python modules from ZIP files is implemented
(see zipimport_).

Per its name, ``FrozenImporter`` is responsible for supporting "frozen modules",
which is something we have mentioned, but haven't explained yet. In summary,
frozen modules are pure-Python modules which have been compiled to bytecode, and
embedded in the interpreter (as data blobs). This means that these modules will
be available to import, even if we can't locate the standard library — hence why
freezing the ``encodings`` module allows the interpreter to initialize. They are
also key to be able to bootstrap the import machinery, which is mostly
implemented in pure-Python as importlib_. They can be disabled via the
``-X frozen_modules``/``PYTHON_FROZEN_MODULES`` options.

Coming back to ``getpath``, it needs to locate both the platform-specific and
independent parts of the standard library. The search logic is incredibly
complicated, but in a normal scenario, it roughly goes as follows:

1) Find the installation prefixes (``sys.prefix`` and ``sys.exec_prefix``)
    - Manually set via ``PYTHONHOME`` or ``PyConfig.home``
    - Set via the ``home`` key of ``pyvenv.cfg``, which presence indicates we are in a virtual environment
    - Derived from the location of ``libpython``, if dynamically linked
    - Derived from the location of the interpreter
    - Falls back to the hardcoded installation prefix calculated at build time
2) Search for the standard library ZIP file in ``sys.prefix``
3) Search for the platform-independent standard library directory (``stdlib_dir``) in ``sys.prefix``
4) Search for the platform-dependent standard library directory (``platstdlib_dir``) in ``sys.exec_prefix``

Following this, with the new changes, we show a warning referring to the
"standard library" — omitting the "platform-independent" part for simplicity —
if we were unable to locate either the ZIP file, or ``stdlib_dir``. If one of
these were found, we then check ``platstdlib_dir``, and show a warning referring
to the "platform-dependent standard library".

When issuing these warnings, we also try to hint to the possible cause — either
via a bad home path (eg. setting ``PYTHONHOME``), or via a miscalculated
``sys.prefix`` or ``sys.exec_prefix``.

There is a limitation, however, which is when the user overwrites the path
calculation functionality — by setting ``module_search_paths`` and
``module_search_paths_set=1``. This is currently the case on sub-interpreters.

There's also a possibility that the embedding users might trigger this warning,
even though they shouldn't be able as long as they are the initialization APIs
correctly. Similarly, in some cases, users might set a bad home (eg. setting
``PYTHONHOME`` incorrectly), or might run into some edge case where ``getpath``
fails to calculate the prefixes correctly, and instead rely on using
``PYTHONPATH`` to put the standard library directories in ``sys.path``.

In such cases, ``-X pathconfig_warnings=0`` or ``PYTHON_FROZEN_MODULES=0`` might
be set to suppress the warning.

Reading ``/proc/self/exe`` for a more accurate ``sys.executable``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In addition to the above-mentioned work on ``getpath``, I looked into the
possibility of reading the ``/proc/self/exe`` symlink on Linux systems to be
able to determine the interpreter executable more accurately.

Currently, on POSIX platforms, we either derive ``sys.executable`` from
``PyConfig.program_name``, or ``argv``. The latter can be problematic, as
exemplified in https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/124241.

I opened https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/145486 to attempt to solve this
issue by reading ``/proc/self/exe``. It sets the ``real_executable`` input
variable of ``getpath`` to the real interpreter path, but contrary to its name,
it seems we actually rely on being able to set ``real_executable`` to a fake
path. In fact, macOS, which was already setting ``real_executable`` based on
``_NSGetExecutablePath``, has a specific workaround to replace its value with
the value of ``executable``.

.. code:: python

    ...

    if not executable and SEP in program_name:
        # Resolve partial path program_name against current directory
        executable = abspath(program_name)

    if not executable:
        # All platforms default to real_executable if known at this
        # stage. POSIX does not set this value.
        executable = real_executable
    elif os_name == 'darwin':
        # QUIRK: On macOS we may know the real executable path, but
        # if our caller has lied to us about it (e.g. most of
        # test_embed), we need to use their path in order to detect
        # whether we are in a build tree. This is true even if the
        # executable path was provided in the config.
        real_executable = executable

    ...

The ``getpath`` code is extremely complicated and fragile, so solving this is
not trivial. Even after working on it for a couple years, it's still difficult
to understand all quirks and custom behaviors that users downstream are relying
on. Aggravating this, there is a lot of behavior the tests rely on that is not
representative of real-world use — the tests rely on it to make their
implementation easier.

There's a lot of technical debt, and we are stuck with a lot of decisions
resulting of lack of foresight. I am not blaming anyone here, this is just
extremely old code in a very big project, so this is completely normal.

I spent a fairly large amount of time this week looking at this code, and
debugging under a couple different scenarios, in order to better understand what
it was doing, and which part of it was actually required. This was motivated by
the issue we are discussing, but it wasn't restricted only to the apparently
affect code areas.

It would also make sense to point out that there are very different scenarios
that this code supports. The main one is the regular interpreter initialization
— meaning the process the user spawned was the actual interpreter (eg.
``/usr/bin/python``). Within the context of this discussion, this scenario isn't
all that complex. When it start becoming complex is the other scenario,
embedding.

The issues caused by my change seem to be mainly to do with the embedding
applications, which set ``PyConfig.program_name``, and expect
``real_executable`` to be derived from it. This is because ``real_executable``
is used to determine the installation prefixes, and then locate the standard
library directories.

I still need to look a bit more into the actual needs of embedding users, so
that I can better understand if there should be a different field, in addition
to ``program_name``, to specify the actual Python interpreter binary.

The more apparent solution would be to have embedding users set
``PyConfig.home``, which should work if they're either working within an
existing Python installation, or if they are providing the installation
themselves. However, setting ``home`` bypasses the virtual environment
detection. This is something we could change — we could try looking for
``pyvenv.cfg`` in the specified ``home`` — however it is not clear to me that
this is the best solution.

I think the more short-term fix would be to set ``real_executable`` to
``program_name`` if it was provided by the user. This should result in the
current behavior of searching for the installation prefixes in the path the
emebedding users provided. When running the Python interpreter itself,
``program_name`` wouldn't be set, so we would use the real ``real_executable``
value.

That said, that needs proper testing, and since I am not getting paid for this
work, I think I'll probably have to postpone it — that is assuming my ADHD
doesn't pull me back into it 😟.

Next Week
---------

Well, this will be basically the same was last week, minus the CPython work.

* Finish implementing the changes for the next https://github.com/pypackaging-native/pkgconf-pypi

While waiting for a review on the ``pkgconf-pypi`` work, I'd like to start on
the following:

* Document the technical aspects of https://github.com/FFY00/dynamic-library
* Add text to PEP 739 specifying what happens on conflicts

Some other lower priority work I'd like to pick back up the next couple weeks:

* Finish https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/24064


.. _Github sponsors page: https://github.com/sponsors/FFY00
.. _module search path: https://docs.python.org/3/library/sys_path_init.html
.. _PYTHON_PATHCONFIG_WARNINGS: https://docs.python.org/3.15/using/cmdline.html#envvar-PYTHON_PATHCONFIG_WARNINGS
.. _Steve Dower: https://github.com/zooba
.. _._pth files: https://docs.python.org/3/library/sys_path_init.html#pth-files
.. _interpreter initialization: https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/init_config.html
.. _path configuration: https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/init_config.html#python-path-configuration
.. _importer: https://docs.python.org/3/glossary.html#term-importer
.. _zipimport: https://docs.python.org/3/library/zipimport.html
.. _importlib: https://docs.python.org/3/library/importlib.html
