.. meta::
    :title: 2026-W09
    :date: 2026-02-23T20:20:55.963961


This Week
---------

Introducing the Development Log
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

This week I added the 'Development Log' section to my ffy00.github.io website.
The main goal of this log is to try to help me manage my AHDH. I have been
really struggling with productivity and reliability for the last couple years,
which has been deterimental on both personal and professional levels. I'm hoping
by keeping better track of my work I will be able to better control my focus,
allowing me to more reliably follow through with ongoing work. Additionally, I
will also try to roughly plan the work for the following week here, to hopefully
help keep me accountable.

CPython
+++++++

``ModuleNotFoundError`` hints
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Following the addition of module name suggestion hints to
``ModuleNotFoundError`` in https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/142512, my
main contribution to CPython this week was adding a hint for when a native
extension module for another Python installation (could be different ABI, arch,
etc.) is present.

.. code:: python

    Python 3.15.0a6+ free-threading build (heads/main-dirty:f282f7aed91, Feb 19 2026, 17:33:04) [GCC 15.2.1 20260209] on linux
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    >>> import foo
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<python-input-0>", line 1, in <module>
        import foo
    ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'foo'. Although a module with this name was found for a different Python version (foo.cpython-315-x86_64-linux-gnu.so).

This was motivated by a discussion with the maintainers of Python on
Debian/Ubuntu, who informed me of their plans for 3.15.

They are planning to ship ship a free-threading build of Python alongside the
regular one, and to make packaging easier for them, they are planning to patch
the free-threading build to use the same site-packages directory as the regular
one.

While they can account for this in the Python packages they ship, it completely
breaks Python packaging tooling. While possible, it is extremely uncommon, and
unpractical, for projects to publish non-pure wheels to PyPI that are compatible
with both regular and free-threading builds of Python — practiacally all
published non-pure wheels target a single Python ABI variant.

Sharing site-packages between the two builds means Python installers targeting
each build will be install packages to the same location. Given that non-pure
wheels will only support one of the builds, installing packages on one build
will also be placing incompatible packages in the other.

For single module packages, trying to import them in an incompatible build will
result in a ``ModuleNotFoundError``. On more complex packages this can lead to
internal imports failing, which can then snowball into more complex and
obscure errors. Other aggravating detail is that most Python installers will see
that the package is installed, but will not detect that it is incompatible with
the running interpreter. Most users looking at a ``ModuleNotFoundError`` will
think the package is not installed, so they will try to install it, which may
fail with the installer telling them the package is already installed. This is a
very confusing user experience.

Trying to detect such cases and adding a hint to ``ModuleNotFoundError`` should
somewhat help with the user experience, though it will still be pretty awful.
That said, installing packages to system environment does requires users to pass
``--break-system-packages``, so with Python 3.15 coming up we should try to more
aggressively discourage from overriding this this safeguard.

Initialization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

At the end of this week I also started working on a couple improvements to the
Python initialization.

* Warn when we can't find the standard library  during the
  `module search path initialization`_
* Freeze all modules needed during the interpreter initialization
* Add the ``-X pathconfig_warnings``/``PYTHON_PATHCONFIG_WARNINGS`` options to
  disable `module search path initialization`_ warnings

The main motivation for this work was to improve the UX when the module search
path is broken, resulting in obscure/unclear errors, such as the following.

.. code:: shell

    $ PYTHONHOME=nonsense ./python -c 'print("foo!")'
    Fatal Python error: Failed to import encodings module
    Python runtime state: core initialized
    Exception ignored in the internal traceback machinery:
    ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'traceback'
    ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'encodings'

    Stack (most recent call first):

Other minor work
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* Researched and provided feedback to https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/82963
* Noticed an issue in the lazy import tests and fixed (https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/145213)
* Noticed that ``make install`` was producing some errors and fixed it (https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/145221)
* Minor update to pixi packages docs (https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/145222)
* Looked into the state of https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/133882
* Reviewed and merged https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/144637
* Merged https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/137296

pkgconf-pypi
++++++++++++

Reached a decision in https://github.com/pypackaging-native/pkgconf-pypi/issues/97
regarding the changes for next version, and started implementing it.

This consists of moving the special Python-specifc behavior from the ``pkgconf``
script into a new ``pkgconf-pypi`` script, leaving the ``pkgconf`` script
behaving as a "vanilla" ``pkgconf`` binary by default, with some caveats.

Next Week...
------------

My main goal for next week is to finish implementing the changes for the next
https://github.com/pypackaging-native/pkgconf-pypi version, and finishing the
CPython initialization improvements.

While waiting for a review on the ``pkgconf-pypi`` work, I'd like to start on
the following:

* Document the technical aspects of https://github.com/FFY00/dynamic-library
* Add text to PEP 739 specifying what happens on conflicts

Some other lower priority work I'd like to pick back up the next couple weeks:

* Finish https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/24064


.. _module search path initialization: https://docs.python.org/3/library/sys_path_init.html
